ALEXEY Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor
Pavlovitch Karamazov, a landowner well known in our district in his
own day, and still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and
tragic death, which happened thirteen years ago, and which I shall
describe in its proper place. For the present I will only say that
this "landowner"- for so we used to call him, although he hardly
spent a day of his life on his own estate- was a strange type, yet
one pretty frequently to be met with, a type abject and vicious and
at the same time senseless. But he was one of those senseless
persons who are very well capable of looking after their worldly
affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch,
for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of the
smallest; he ran to dine at other men's tables, and fastened on
them as a toady, yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred
thousand roubles in hard cash. At the same time, he was all his
life one of the most senseless, fantastical fellows in the whole
district. I repeat, it was not stupidity- the majority of these
fantastical fellows are shrewd and intelligent enough- but just
senselessness, and a peculiar national form of it.
He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by
his first wife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor
Pavlovitch's first wife, Adelaida Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly
rich and distinguished noble family, also landowners in our
district, the Miusovs. How it came to pass that an heiress, who was
also a beauty, and moreover one of those vigorous intelligent
girls, so common in this generation, but sometimes also to be found
in the last, could have married such a worthless, puny weakling, as
we all called him, I won't attempt to explain. I knew a young lady
of the last "romantic" generation who after some years of an
enigmatic passion for a gentleman, whom she might quite easily have
married at any moment, invented insuperable obstacles to their
union, and ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather
deep and rapid river from a high bank, almost a precipice, and so
perished, entirely to satisfy her own caprice, and to be like
Shakespeare's Ophelia. Indeed, if this precipice, a chosen and
favourite spot of hers, had been less picturesque, if there had
been a prosaic flat bank in its place, most likely the suicide
would never have taken place. This is a fact, and probably there
have been not a few similar instances in the last two or three
generations. Adelaida Ivanovna Miusov's action was similarly, no
doubt, an echo of other people's ideas, and was due to the
irritation caused by lack of mental freedom. She wanted, perhaps,
to show her feminine independence, to override class distinctions
and the despotism of her family. And a pliable imagination
persuaded her, we must suppose, for a brief moment, that Fyodor
Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasitic position, was one of the bold
and ironical spirits of that progressive epoch, though he was, in
fact, an ill-natured buffoon and nothing more. What gave the
marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an elopement, and
this greatly captivated Adelaida Ivanovna's fancy. Fyodor
Pavlovitch's position at the time made him specially eager for any
such enterprise, for he was passionately anxious to make a career
in one way or another. To attach himself to a good family and
obtain a dowry was an alluring prospect. As for mutual love it did
not exist apparently, either in the bride or in him, in spite of
Adelaida Ivanovna's beauty. This was, perhaps, a unique case of the
kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was always of a
voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on the
slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman who
made no particular appeal to his senses.
Immediately after the elopement Adelaida Ivanovna discerned in a
flash that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt. The
marriage accordingly showed itself in its true colours with
extraordinary rapidity. Although the family accepted the event
pretty quickly and apportioned the runaway bride her dowry, the
husband and wife began to lead a most disorderly life, and there
were everlasting scenes between them. It was said that the young
wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity than Fyodor
Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money up to
twenty five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that
those thousands were lost to her forever. The little village and
the rather fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did
his utmost for a long time to transfer to his name, by means of
some deed of conveyance. He would probably have succeeded, merely
from her moral fatigue and desire to get rid of him, and from the
contempt and loathing he aroused by his persistent and shameless
importunity. But, fortunately, Adelaida Ivanovna's family
intervened and circumvented his greediness. It is known for a fact
that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife, but
rumour had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but was
beaten by her, for she was a hot-tempered, bold, dark-browed,
impatient woman, possessed of remarkable physical strength.
Finally, she left the house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch
with a destitute divinity student, leaving Mitya, a child of three
years old, in her husband's hands. Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch
introduced a regular harem into the house, and abandoned himself to
orgies of drunkenness. In the intervals he used to drive all over
the province, complaining tearfully to each and all of Adelaida
Ivanovna's having left him, going into details too disgraceful for
a husband to mention in regard to his own married life. What seemed
to gratify him and flatter his self-love most was to play the
ridiculous part of the injured husband, and to parade his woes with
embellishments.
"One would think that you'd got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch,
you seem so pleased in spite of your sorrow," scoffers said to him.
Many even added that he was glad of a new comic part in which to
play the buffoon, and that it was simply to make it funnier that he
pretended to be unaware of his ludicrous position. But, who knows,
it may have been simplicity. At last he succeeded in getting on the
track of his runaway wife. The poor woman turned out to be in
Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinity student, and where
she had thrown herself into a life of complete emancipation. Fyodor
Pavlovitch at once began bustling about, making preparations to go
to Petersburg, with what object he could not himself have said. He
would perhaps have really gone; but having determined to do so he
felt at once entitled to fortify himself for the journey by another
bout of reckless drinking. And just at that time his wife's family
received the news of her death in Petersburg. She had died quite
suddenly in a garret, according to one story, of typhus, or as
another version had it, of starvation. Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk
when he heard of his wife's death, and the story is that he ran out
into the street and began shouting with joy, raising his hands to
Heaven: "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace," but
others say he wept without restraint like a little child, so much
so that people were sorry for him, in spite of the repulsion he
inspired. It is quite possible that both versions were true, that
he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time wept for her who
released him. As a general rule, people, even the wicked, are much
more naive and simple-hearted than we suppose. And we ourselves
are, too.
It was late evening when K. arrived. The village lay deep in snow.
There was nothing to be seen of Castle Mount, for mist and darkness
surrounded it, and not the faintest glimmer of light showed where
the great castle lay. K. stood on the wooden bridge leading from the
road to the village for a long time, looking up at what seemed to be
a void.
Then he went in search of somewhere to stay the night. People
were still awake at the inn. The landlord had no room available, but
although greatly surprised and confused by the arrival of a guest so
late at night, he was willing to let K. sleep on a straw mattress in the
saloon bar. K. agreed to that. Several of the local rustics were still
sitting over their beer, but he didn’t feel like talking to anyone. He
fetched the straw mattress down from the attic himself, and lay down
near the stove. It was warm, the locals were silent, his weary eyes
gave them a cursory inspection, and then he fell asleep.
But soon afterwards he was woken again. A young man in town
clothes, with a face like an actor’s—narrowed eyes, strongly marked
eyebrows—was standing beside him with the landlord. The rustics
were still there too, and some of them had turned their chairs round
so that they could see and hear better. The young man apologized
very civilly for having woken K., introduced himself as the son of the
castle warden, and added: ‘This village belongs to the castle, so anyone
who stays or spends the night here is, so to speak, staying or spending
the night at the castle. And no one’s allowed to do that without a
permit from the count. However, you don’t have any such permit, or
at least you haven’t shown one.’
K. had half sat up, had smoothed down his hair, and was now looking
up at the two men. ‘What village have I come to, then?’ he asked.
‘Is there a castle in these parts?’
‘There most certainly is,’ said the young man slowly, as some of
those present shook their heads at K.’s ignorance. ‘Count Westwest’s*
castle.’
6 The Castle
‘And I need this permit to spend the night here?’ asked K., as if to
convince himself that he had not, by any chance, dreamed the earlier
information.
‘Yes, you need a permit,’ was the reply, and there was downright
derision at K.’s expense in the young man’s voice as, with arm outstretched,
he asked the landlord and the guests: ‘Or am I wrong?
Doesn’t he need a permit?’
‘Well, I’ll have to go and get a permit, then,’ said K., yawning, and
throwing off his blanket as if to rise to his feet.
‘Oh yes? Who from?’ asked the young man.
‘Why, from the count,’ said K. ‘I suppose there’s nothing else for it.’
‘What, go and get a permit from the count himself at midnight?’
cried the young man, retreating a step.
‘Is that impossible?’ asked K., unruffled. ‘If so, why did you wake
me up?’
At this the young man was positively beside himself. ‘The manners
of a vagrant!’ he cried. ‘I demand respect for the count’s authority!
I woke you up to tell you that you must leave the count’s land
immediately.’
‘That’s enough of this farce,’ said K. in a noticeably quiet voice.
He lay down and pulled the blanket over him. ‘Young man, you’re
going rather too far, and I’ll have something to say about your conduct
tomorrow. The landlord and these gentlemen are my witnesses,
if I need any. As for the rest of it, let me tell you that I’m the land
surveyor,* and the count sent for me. My assistants will be coming
tomorrow by carriage with our surveying instruments. I didn’t want
to deprive myself of a good walk here through the snow, but unfortunately
I did lose my way several times, and that’s why I arrived so
late. I myself was well aware, even before you delivered your lecture,
that it was too late to present myself at the castle. That’s why I contented
myself with sleeping the night here, and you have been—to
put it mildly—uncivil enough to disturb my slumbers. And that’s all
the explanation I’m making. Goodnight, gentlemen.’ And K. turned
to the stove.
‘Land surveyor?’ he heard someone ask hesitantly behind his back,
and then everyone fell silent. But the young man soon pulled himself
together and told the landlord, in a tone just muted enough to sound
as if he were showing consideration for the sleeping K., but loud
enough for him to hear what was said: ‘I’ll telephone and ask.’ Oh, so
The Castle 7
there was a telephone in this village inn, was there? They were very
well equipped here. As a detail that surprised K., but on the whole
he had expected this. It turned out that the telephone was installed
almost right above his head, but drowsy as he was, he had failed to
notice it. If the young man really had to make a telephone call, then
with the best will in the world he could not fail to disturb K.’s sleep.
The only point at issue was whether K. would let him use the telephone,
and he decided that he would. In which case, however, there
was no point in making out that he was asleep, so he turned over on
his back again. He saw the locals clustering nervously together and
conferring; well, the arrival of a land surveyor was no small matter.
The kitchen door had opened and there, filling the whole doorway,
stood the monumental figure of the landlady. The landlord approached
on tiptoe to let her know what was going on. And now the telephone
conversation began. The warden was asleep, but a deputy warden, or
one of several such deputies, a certain Mr Fritz, was on the line. The
young man, who identified himself as Schwarzer, told Mr Fritz how
he had found K., a man of very ragged appearance in his thirties,
sleeping peacefully on a straw mattress, with a tiny rucksack as a pillow
and a gnarled walking-stick within reach. He had naturally felt suspicious,
said the young man, and as the landlord had clearly neglected
to do his duty it had been up to him to investigate the matter. K., he
added, had acted very churlishly on being woken, questioned, and
threatened in due form with expulsion from the county, although, as
it finally turned out, perhaps with some reason, for he claimed to be
a land surveyor and said his lordship the count had sent for him. Of
course it was at least their formal duty to check this claim, so he,
Schwarzer, would like Fritz to enquire in Central Office, find out
whether any such surveyor was really expected, and telephone back
with the answer at once.
Then all was quiet. Fritz went to make his enquiries, and here at
the inn they waited for the answer, K. staying where he was, not even
turning round, not appearing at all curious, but looking straight ahead
of him. The way Schwarzer told his tale, with a mingling of malice
and caution, gave him an idea of what might be called the diplomatic
training of which even such insignificant figures in the castle as
Schwarzer had a command. There was no lack of industry there either;
Central Office was working even at night, and clearly it answered
questions quickly, for Fritz soon rang back. His report, however,